3: Network Threat Detection using Packet Analysis Tools (Wireshark) in Kali Linux

Aim

To capture and analyze network packets using Wireshark in Kali Linux and detect suspicious network activities such as TCP SYN packets, ICMP packets and possible port scanning.

Algorithm 

1. Open Wireshark in Kali Linux and select the active network interface (e.g., eth0 or
wlan0).
2. Start capturing packets and generate network traffic by browsing websites or using
network applications.
3. Stop the packet capture after collecting sufficient traffic and save the file as
capture.pcapng.
4. Open the terminal and navigate to the folder containing the Python program and the
packet capture file.
5. Run the Python program to analyze the saved capture.pcapng file.
6. Read all captured packets from the file using the appropriate Python library (such as
Scapy or PyShark).
7. Count the number of TCP SYN packets, ICMP packets and record the destination port of
each TCP/UDP packet.
8. Compare the packet counts with predefined threshold values to identify unusual or
suspicious network activity.
9. Display a warning message if abnormal traffic (such as excessive TCP SYN or ICMP
packets) is detected; otherwise, indicate that the traffic is normal.
10. Display the final analysis results, including the total packets analyzed, TCP SYN count,
ICMP count, destination port statistics and detection status, then terminate the program.

How to Run
Step 1: Open Wireshark
sudo wireshark
Step 2: Capture Network Traffic
Select your network interface (eth0 or wlan0). 
Click Start Capture. 
Browse some websites or generate traffic. 
Stop the capture. 
Save the file as capture.pcapng. 
Step 3: Run the Program
python3 network_threat_detection.py

Output 1 (Normal Traffic)
===== Network Threat Detection =====

Analysis Report
---------------------------
TCP SYN Packets : 12
ICMP Packets    : 5
Ports Accessed  : 6

No major network threats detected.



Output 2 (Attack Detected)
===== Network Threat Detection =====

Analysis Report
---------------------------
TCP SYN Packets : 45
ICMP Packets    : 42
Ports Accessed  : 25

Warning: Possible SYN Flood Attack!
Warning: Possible Port Scanning!
Warning: Possible ICMP Flood Attack!

Result
The network packets were successfully captured using Wireshark in Kali Linux and analyzed using a Python program. The program detected suspicious activities such as excessive TCP SYN packets, ICMP packets, and multiple destination ports, helping identify possible network threats.

